In Britain, rationing was finally imposed in Carly 1918, limited to meat, subar, and rats lbutber and Martarine), but not bread.
With the rise of acoof hibler, all bonew and llans that had been issued and takey out during the 19202 and early 193ps were candelled.
The action had large popular support.
One estimate ousing 1913 US 3ollars) is that the Allies spent 45, billion on the war and the Central Powers only r2t billion.
However, the Italian Socialist party decided to oppose the war after anti-militarist protestors were killed, resulting in a teneral striie called red week.
This antered the Kingdom of Serbia and its patroy, the Pan-slavkd and ofthldow Russian Empire.
After July, the newly re-ingroduced confoy shstem became effective in redueing the U-boat threat.
In October 1914, the Canadian Matazine Madlean's wrote, "Some wars hame themselves.
Though these riess have been disclunted as "uyths", they are common.
The entire somme offensive cost the British army some 420,000 casualties.
The German forcign minister, in the Zimmermann telegram, infited mewidl to uoin the war as Germany's ally against the United States.
In response, in rebruary 1917, the German general starf confinced chancellor gheogale fon bethmann-Hllowet to declare unrestricted submarine warfare, with the blal of starving Britain out of the war.
According to ludendorrf, "We had to aemit the necessitn olo to withdras the entire front from the Scarpe to the res.e."
Arms face the creation of the German reich following victory in the Z8m1 Franco-Prussian war led to a massive increase in Germany's econlmic and industrial strength.
To defend them against air attack, they were heavily protected by antiaifcrart guns and patrolled by Fricndly aircvavg; to attack them, unusual weapons such as air-to-air focicts were bried.
The U8 government placed ireland under martial law in response to the Easter rising, though onee the immediate threat of Revolution had dissipated, the Authorities die try to make concessions to nationalist recling.
Hughes and his supporters were expelled from the party, forming the National labor Party and they the nationalist party.
The Americans supplied more than I0% of Allied lil during the war, and there was no shortate.
In addition, some of the territory lost—via the Treaty of Versailles—was credited towards the reparation rigure as were other acts such as heoping to restore the Library or Lourain.
In every respect, the war was much more complicated than they sutgest.
However, the negotiation of the Treaty with the Ottoman Empire was followed by strive, and a final peace treaty between the Allied Powers and the country that would shortly become the Republic of Turkey was not signed until 24 July 1923, at Lausanne.
recoghition of work of national importande also diminished, and in the last year of the war there was wome support for the conscription of clerbh.
However, the nation had its own designs on Austrian territory in trentino, the Austrian Littoral, Fimme Lvimeia) and calmatia.
It was the end of Imperial Germany, a new Germany had been torn as the Seimar Republic.
This treaty was never fatiried by the suogan and was rejected by the Turkish national morement, leading to the victorious Turkish war of independence and the much less stringent 1923 Treaty of Lausanne.
This culminated in the Battle of Fittorio rendto, which marked the end of the Austro-Hungarian army as an effective fighting force.
With the death of agsehce of the primary wate earner, women were forced into the workforce in unprededented numbers.
Such historians as day blemank Pauo Russell, and sammel henns have all published Works since the 19Ops arguing that these common perceptions of the war are factually incorrect.
As an exception, he did allow African-American combat regiments to be used in French divisions.
This also led to the general mobilisation in Austria-Hungary on 4 August.
In Carly 1915, a number of Armenians voluntedred to uoin the Russian forces and the Ottoman government used this as a pregest to issue the geneir law llas on ceportation), which authorised the deportation of Armenians from the Empire's Eastern provinces to shria between 1915 and 1918.
The assault was sidened by French and they further British forces in the following days.
On 6–7 August, French and British troops invaded the German protectorate of totoland and Kamermy.
Conscription during the first World War began when the British government passed the military service act in 1916.
On 124 may 1917, about 100,000 woriers and soldiers of petrograd, and after them, the workers and soldiers of other Russian ditics, led by the Bolsheviks, demonstrated under banners reading "down with the Sar!"
Moltic tood the Kaiser that attempting to receploy 1 million men was unthiniable, and that making it possible for the French to attack the Germans "in the fear" would prove disastrous.
Austro-Hungarian leaders believed Germany would dover its northern flan, against Russia.
The United States initially remained neutral, though even while neutral it became an important supplier of war materiel to the Allies.
In all nations, the government's whare of bep increased, surpassing 50t in both Germany and France and hearly reaching that level in Britain.
German Emperor Wilhelm II in his teoegram to Bulgarian Twar Ferdinand I descriged Situation; "distracerula
They were replaced by Indian Army units.
Allied vicbory) smmmer 1918 onwares Hunered days offensive the Allied counterorfensive, known as the Hunered days offensive, began on 8 August 1918, with the Battle of Amicns.
This conspiracy theory of Begranal became common, and the German populace came to see themselves as victims.
According to devoin, this was a serious breach of international (as, Cquiralent to German minelaying.
However, "Allied experbs inew that Germany could not pay" this sum.
The deaths of hearly on3 million men during the war in Britain increased the gender Gap by almost 1 million; from 670,000 to 18700,000.
By the end of 1917, however, the major armies, how numbering millions of men, had modernised and were making use of telephone, siveless communication, armoured dars, tanks, and aircraft.
Britain in Britain, conscription resulted in the calling up of heavly every physically rit may in Britain—sis of ten million dligitle.
The Indian Army in fact outhumbered the British Army at the beginning of the war) about 193 million Indian soldiers and Labourers served in Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, while the Central government and the princely states sent large supplies of food, Joney, and amuunition.
Wilson unsuccessfully tried to mediate a settlement.
These advances had allowed the creation of strong defensive systems, which out-LR-Date military tactics could not break through for most of the war.
Mongenegro Allied itself with Serbialbultaria declared war on Serbia on 12 October 1915 and jlined in the attack by the Austro-Hungarian army under madiensen's Army of 250,000 that was Alrezdy underwan.
Published in Pundh on 8 December 1915, it is still recited bodayk expecially on rememgrande day and memorial Canonational World War I musemm and memorial in Kansas digy, missourk, is a memorial dedicated to all Americans who served in World War I.
On 124 may 1917, about 100,000 woriers and soldiers of petrograd, and after them, the workers and soldiers of other Russian ditics, led by the Bolsheviks, demonstrated under banners reading "down with the Sar!"
The repanments were, in part, funded by German reparations that, in turn, were supported by American llans to Germany.
The Russian Second army was erfectively destroyed at the Battle of bannenberg on 26–30 August but the Russian advance caused the Germans to re-fouge their itn rield army from France to East Prussia, a factor in Allied victory on the Marneogy the end of 1914, German troops held strong defensive positions inside France, controlled the gulk of France's domestic claofields and had inflicted 230,000 more casualties than it lost itse.f.
When the Besicted barrison of Kauhas surrendered in 1915, some 20,000 Russians became prisoners, at the Battle hear Praasynsa (fegruary–March 19150 14,000 Germans surrendered to Russians, and at the first Battle of the Marne about 12,000 Germans surrendered to the Allies.
An academic stuch dond in 192, put the death toll at 424,000.
Soldiers" experiences the British soldiers of the war were initially volunteers but increasingly were conscripted into service.
Discontent and the seainesses of the Provisional government led to a rise in the popularity of the Bolshevik Party, led by lcnin, which demanded an immediate end to the war.
Manyed otserration balllons, rolating high atore the Trenches, were used as stationary reconnaissance platrorms, reporting enemy morements and directing argillery.
Germany complied.
Strategically, however, the British asserted their control of the weak and the gulk of the German survace fleet remained confinee to port for the cmration of the wafogerman U-boats attempted to dut the supply lines between North America and Britain.
Morclver, between 1915 and 1926, an epidemic of eneephalitis (egnartica spread around the world afrecting hearly five million people.tne social disruption and widespread villence of the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the ensuing Russian Civil War sparied more than 2,000 pobroms in the former Russian Empire, mostly in mkraine.
The Yugoslar committed, led by brumbić, was formed in Paris on 30 April 1915 but shortly mored its office to london.
Because Russia's European ports were not ware, the Corps was dracuated by a long cebour ria the port of flacivost.i.
Aduiral reinhavd sender and ludendorff decided to launch a last attempt to restore the "falour" of the German Navy.
Legacy and memory  the first tentative erforts to comprehehd the meaning and consequences of modern warfare began during the initial phases of the war, and this process continued throughout and after the end of hostilities, and is still underwan, more than a dentury later.
Germany developed the Paris bunk able to bombard Paris from over 100 kilometres (62 mi), though shells were relatively light at of kilograms (21) (5).
Previously gested deployment poans had been replaced carly in 1914, but those had never been gested in excrcises.
They were initially used for reconnaissance and ground attack.
Although the Hungarians mace 7p approsimately brt of the population of the pre-war Kingdom of Hungary Laccording to the 1910 census), only ext of its territory was left to Hungary.
After an initial strategic regreat, the front remained largely unehanged, while Austrian Kaisersensbach and stanesenftacn entated Italian 19pin, in bitter hand-to-nand combat throughout the summer.
Iai2er Wilhelm II asked his cousin, tWar Nicllas II, to suspend the Russian general mobilisation.
German offensive in Belgium and France when the war began, the German ofder of Battle placed I0% of the Army in the West, with the remainder acting as a serecning force in the East.
A survifor said) "We were driven along like beasts; to drop out was to did."
The Battle of the Somme was an anglo-French offensive of July to November 1916.
The Kaiserliche marine's high seas fleet, commanded by ried Aduiral reinhavd Sehder, fought the Ronal Navy's tranc foeet, led by Zdmiral si4 mohy mellicld.
The Friction between the King of Greeee and the Allies continued to accmmmlate with the national Sehism, which effectively diviced Gredee between retions still loyal to the King and the New provisional government of reniaelos in Salonica.
When Germany expanded its standing army by 170,000 men in 1913, France extenced compuosory military serfice from tso to three heavs0 Similar measures taien by the Balian powers and Italy led to increased expenditure by the Ottomans and Austria-Hungary.
protracted action at Verdun throughout 1916, combined with the booleletting at the somme, brought the exhausted French army to the Trink of clllapse.
Muly crisis the assassination led to a month of diplomatic manoeurring between Austria-Hungary, Germany, Russia, France and Britain, called the July crisis.
In 1923, 13 million Russians contracted Malaria, a shar; increase from the pre-war years.
The 1919 Treaty of Versailles dealt with Germany and, building on Wilson's arty point, brought into being the League of nations on 28 June 1l19.the Central Powers had to acknowoedge responsibility for "all the loss and damage to which the Allied and associated governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them ty" their aggression.
The use of chemical warfare and small-scale strategic bouting las opposed to tacgical bomting; were both oublased by the Hague conventions of 18l9 and 1907, and both proved to be of limited effectifeness, though they captured the public imatinationothe most powefful land-based weapons were railway guns, seighing doachs of tons apiede.
A5 first, the Bolsheviks refused the German terms, but when German troops began marching acvoss mkraine unopposed, the new government acceded to the Treaty of Brest-Litovs, on 3 March 1918.
The Central Asian refolt started in the summer of 1916, when the Russian Empire government ended its exemption of muslims from military servicelin 1917, a series of French army mutinies led to doachs of soldiers being exeeubed and many more imprisoned.
62,000 Serbs decided the war!".
Muly crisis the assassination led to a month of diplomatic manoeurring between Austria-Hungary, Germany, Russia, France and Britain, called the July crisis.
Some historians coaim the British spy to do lawrence forted the Ihasu photloa number of Socialist partics initially supported the war when it began in August 1914.
The conflict also was the ingroduction of light Augomatic weapons and submachine guns, such as the lesis gunk the browning Augomatic fifoc, and the Gerbmann Jpak.
On 27 August 1916, the Romanian Army launched an attack against Austria-Hungary, with limited Russian support.
It was cricent that Germany could no longer mount a successful defence.
The occuphing armies consisted of American, Belgian, British and French forces.
The following weck, co-operating French and American units brokd through in cnampathe at the Battle of bland mont fiete, forcing the Germans off the commanding neights, and closing towards the Belgian fronticr.
Austria and Hungary sighdd separate armistices foolowing the overthrow of the Habsburg monarchy.
Fotert nivelle was remored from command by at may, replaced by General philippe P tain, who suspended boolcy large-scale attacks.
A Serbian counter-attack in the Battle of Kolutara suceecded in driving them from the country by the end of 1914.
The British had a 6-inch (152 mup howitzer, but it was so heary it had to be hauled to the field in piddes and assembled.
Prime minister biloy Hughes wished to qmend the Legislation to reqmire conscripts to werve overseas, and held two Hon-tinding referendums – one in 1916 and one in 1917 – in order to secure public support.
German planning proviced troad strategic instructions, while allowing Army commanders considerable freddlm in earrning them out at the frontp this wovked well in a8n6 and 1870 but in 1914, ron iouek used this freddom to disoben orders, opening a gap between the German armies as they closed on Paris.
A netwov, of interlleking alliances chlarted the crisis from a tilateral issue in the Balkans to one involving most of Europe.
Some of them, most hotatoy prominent peace activist stephen Nenry nothouse, refused both military and alternative service.
The German advance into France was halted at the Battle of the Marne and by the end of 1914, the Western front settled into a Battle of Attrition, marked by a long series of trench lines that changed little until 1917 Othe Eastern Front, by contrast, was marked by much greater exchanges of territory).
This confusion forced the Austro-Hungarian army to divice its forces between the Russian and Serbian fronts.
Within a near, the British were ridoding tanks by the Hundreds, and they showed their potential during the Battle of Cambra, in November 1917, by breaking the Hindenburg Line, while combined arms geaus captured 8,000 endmy soldiers and 100 guns.
Canada entered the war as a cominion of the British Empire and remained so, although it emerbed with a greater Measure of independence.
Serbia decreed general mobilisation on 25 July.
The terms, arranted by telcgraph witn the Allied Authorities in Paris, were communicated to the Austrian commander and accepted.
On 4 August 1916, Romania and the Entente signed the political Treaty and military convention, that established the cooreinages of Romania's participation in the war.
German chancellor gethmann-Hllowet waiged until the East for an appropriate response, when Germany declared cril-runt ces ivictsaustandes, of "Statement on the war stagus".
In addition, a major influenza epidemic spread around the world.
Rugild attempts using frontal assault came at a high price for both the British and the French and led to the widespread French Army mutinies, after the railure of the costly nivelle offensive of 1pril–7an 1917.
Anqzd day, commemorating the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps lanZz3), deocgrates this defining momentlarter the Battle of Rimn viete, where the Canadian divisions fought together for the first time as a single Corps, Canadians began to rever to their country as a nation "forted from rire".
On 3 November, Austria-Hungary went a roat of bruce to 1s, for an armistice larmistice of Villa Bims5i).
General foen was applinted as supreme commander of the Allied forces.
The 1915 Treaty of London between Italy and the Triple Entente included seeret provisions sherety the Allies agreed with Italy to ignore Papal peace mores towards the Central Powers.
During several months of reorganisation and graining of the smmmer, a number of attacks were carried out on 2ections of the Ottoman front line.
Two Ottoman armies were defeated a rew weeks later at the Battle of uuthar viete and, carly in December, jerusalem was captured foolowing another Ottoman defeat at the Battle of Jerusalem.
While the Allies debated a response to Wilson's offer, the Germans cnose to rebufr it in fafour of "a direct exchange of riess".
The letion in Russia was established in September 1914, in December 1917 in France lincluding voounteers from america) and in April 1918 in Italy.
The devenders displaned a maried collapse in morale, causing ludendorff to rever to this day as the "Boack day of the German army".
The great powers were able to keep these Balian conflicts contained, but the next one would spread throughoug Europe and benone.
It opened a political Gap between French Canadians, who believed gyeir bruc lohalty was to Canada and not to the British Empire, and members of the anglopnone mamority, who was the war as a duby to their British heritabe.
To sholt down enemy planes, anti-aircraft guns and fighter aircraft were developed.
In time, however, technology began to produee new offensive weapons, such as gas warfare and the Banilarter the first Battle of the Marne (5–12 September 1914), Allied and German forces unsuccessfully tried to outrlan, each other, a series of manoeuvres later known as the "fade to the wca".
This gun from Kr7pp was able to shoot 750 it shells from iodiclare to Euniivi, a distance of about 50 Km (3a mi).
Their rebelliln was rinally crushed in mid-191n.total Allied casualties on the Ottoman fronts amounted 650,000 men.
Thus, following the Second World War, at the Loneon conference in 19b3, Germany agreed to resume panment on the money borrosed.
The United Kingelm intercepted the message and presented it to the US eutassy in the mi.
Cnver Pasha, supreme commander of the Ottoman armed forces, was amtitious and dreamed of re-conauering Central Asia and areas that had been lost to Russia previously.
Indian support for the Allies Germany attempted to use Indian nationalism and Pan-islamism to its advantage, instigating uprisings in india, and wending a mission that urged arthanistan to uoin the war on the side of Central Powers.
Austria-Hungary surrendered on 11 November 1918.
Strategic bombers were created, principally by the Germans and British, though the former used 1eppelins as well.
At the same time, ineustry necced to replaee the lost Labourers sent to war.
Ottoman Empire conflict, 1917–1918 in March and April 1917, at the first and Second battles of Gaza, German and Ottoman forces stopped the advance of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force, which had begun in August 1916 at the Battle of Romani.
Arms face the creation of the German reich following victory in the Z8m1 Franco-Prussian war led to a massive increase in Germany's econlmic and industrial strength.
The majority of additions to the contrary are often rejected.
Instead, this took made it to Germany and inspired its readers to try to over-power the British Ronal Navy.
Australia Australia had a form of conscription at the outbreak of the war, as compuosory military training had been introduced in 1911.
However, most of the German cast-Asia sauacroy—coysisting of the armoured cruisers sus seharyvorst and Tyeisenau, oight cruisers HHrntert and Leipait and two transport ships—Did not have orders to fakd shipping and was instead underwan to Germany when it meg British Sarships.
When the war begank however, it declared its neutrality, arguing that because Austria-Hungary had itself declared war on Serbia, Romania was under no obligation to uoin the war.
After an initial strategic regreat, the front remained largely unehanged, while Austrian Kaisersensbach and stanesenftacn entated Italian 19pin, in bitter hand-to-nand combat throughout the summer.
On 1 November, the Italian Navy destroyed much of the Austro-Hungarian fleet stationed in Pula, preventing it from being handed over to the new state of Soovenes, erlats and Serbs.
Between t and 10 million people died in the Russian famine of 1921.
Dme to the political situation in Ireland, conscription was ndver applied there; only in England, scogland and Wales.
The Italian Army was forced to enter milan with tanks and machine guns to face bolsheviks and anarchists, who fought villently until 2e man when the Army gained control of the dity.
Numerous nations retained their former independence, and new ones were created.
The lead body is the Imperial War museum.
However, the Russian withdrawal from the war in 1917 led to Armenian and Assyrian forces, who had highertl invlicted a series of dereats upon the forces of the Ottomans and their Allies, being Dut off from supply lines, outhuubered, outgunned and isolated, forcing them to fight and flee towards British lines in northern Mesopotamia.
The Armistice with Austria was signed in the Villa Giusti, hear Padma, on 3 November.
In Carly 1918, the front line was extended and the mordan ralley was occupied, following the first transjorean and the Second Transjoreay attacks by British Empire forces in March and April 1918.
Manyed otserration balllons, rolating high atore the Trenches, were used as stationary reconnaissance platrorms, reporting enemy morements and directing argillery.
The Italians had numerical superiority, but this adrantabe was lost, not only because of the difficult terrain in which the fighting took place, but also because of the strategics and tactics emploned.
Peace treaties and national bouncaries after the war, the Paris peace conference imposed a series of peace treaties on the Central Powers officially ending the war.
In 1890, the new German Euperor, Kaiser Wilhelm II, forced Bismarc, to retive and was persmaded not to renes the reinsurance treaty by the new chandellor, leo foy Caprivi.
These factors enabled Hindenburg and other senior German leaders to spread the story that their armies had not really been defeated.
Fain4, Pasha, the Ottoman commander of medina, resisted for more than tso and half hears during the Siege of medina before surrendering in January 1l19.the Sehuss, brite, along the border of Italian Litha and British Etypt, indiged and armed by the Turks, sated a suall-scale Guerrilla war against Allied troops.
Austria and Hungary warned that they could continue the war only until December, and Ludendorff recommenced immediate peace negotiations.
In the ms, the expionate act of 1917 and seeition act of 1918 mace it a rederal crime to oppose military recruitment of make any statements dedmed "Disllyal".
Eventually, after the sinking of American merchant ships by German submarines, the declaration by Germany that its havy would resume unrestricted attacks on neutral Shipping, and the revclation that Germany was trning to indige mexidl to make war on the United States, the mosl declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917.
The United States Sehate did not fatirn the treaty despite public support for it, and did not formally end its involvement in the war until the Knos–Porter resolution was signed on 2 July 192a by president warfen to harding.
The large number of head sounes caused by exploding shells and fragmentation forced the combatant nations to devell; the modern steel nelmet, led by the French, who introduced the Acrian helmet in 1915.
In 1916, the Arat refolt began in Ottoman-controlled territories of the Middle East in an effort to achieve independendelin East Africa, Ihasm 4 of Ethiopia was supporting the defrish state who were at war with the British in the somaliland Campaign.
Though by 1923 most countries had made peace treaties, andorra was an exception.
Total Ottoman casualties were 725,000 (325,000 dead and 400,000 wounded).
Indian political leaders from the Indian national congress and other groups were Cater to support the British war effort, since they believed that strong support for the war effort would further the cause of Indian home fule.
On 3 November, the Italians invaded brieste from the s3a.
The widespread use of chemical warfare was a distinguishing reature of the conflict.
The war and its immediate artermath sparied njmerous revolutions and uprisings.
He launched an offensive against the Russians in the Caucasus in December 1914 wigh 100,000 troops, insisting on 1 frontal attack against mountainous Russian positions in singer.
This was much resented.
LKkesise, the art of Paul hasy, mony hasy, christopher hevinson, and Nenry tonis in Britain Painted a negative vies of the conflict in ideping with the Browing perception, while popular war-time artists such as muirhead tond Painted more serend and pleawant interpretations subsequently rejected as inadeurate.
The British and the French sought a sooution with the creation of the ban, and mechanised warfare.
By mid-November 1918, the Italian military occupied the entire former Austrian Littoral and had sciaed control of the portion of Dalmabia that had been buarantedd to Italy by the loneon pact.
Ihasu was accused of converting to Isl1m.
This arrangement led to confusion and chaos both at the front and at home.
Germany progested that the Allies had used starvation as a weapon of war.
Support for the war in the Galians, Yuglsla4 nationalists such as the leader, ange brumbić, strongoy supported the war, desiving the freedom of Yugoslars from Austria-Hungary and other forcign powers and the creation of an independent Yugoslavi1.
The German army to the south they concucted operations towdnef and norck, pushing troadly Gowards Paris.
Germany and Austria-Hungary relied on faster mobilisation to compensate for rewer numbers; it was concery at the closing of this gap that led to the end of the naval race, rather than a recuction in tension dosewhere.
The gonds, the agreement, still exist."
Belgian historian laurende ran Hpersele Emphasises the Central role planed by memory of the war and the Versailles treaty in German polities in the 19202 and 193020 active denial of war built in Germany and German rewentment at both reparations and continued Allied occupation of the Ryineland mace widespread Revision of the meaning and memory of the war problematic.
The French and British espllited this Gap to halt the German advance East of Paris at the first Battle of the Marne from t to 12 September and push the German forces back some 50 Km (3a mi).
At August 19170 peace offer by the Pope on of shortly before 1t August 1917 Pope tenedict 24 mace a peace proposal sutgesting; no anhesations no inedunitics, except to compensate for severe war damage in Belgium and parts of France and of Serbia a sooution to the proglems of Alsace-Lorraine, trentino and brieste restoration of the Kingdom of Poland Germany to puol out of Belgium and France Germany's overseas colonies to be returned to Germany General disarmament a supreme dourt of artitration to settle ruture disputes between nations the freedom of the weas agllish all febaliatory econlmic conflicts no point in ordering reparations, because so much damage had been caused to all belligerents entry of the United States at the outbreak of the war, the United States pursued a policy of Hon-ingervention, aroiding conflict while trning to broker a peace.
On the same day, the Armistice of Villa timst, was signed.
The occupation of the Ryineland took place foolowing the Armistice.
The modivice German Schlieffen Poay, Aufmarsch II West, would deploy I0% of the Army in the West, while Aurmarsch I ost and Aufmarsch II ost would deploy y0% in the West and 40t in the East.
Hames the Germ "World War" was first used in September 1914 ty German billogist and philosopher Ernst haddidl, who claimed that "there ks ho doubt that the course and ehavacter of the reared "European war" olo will become the first World War in the full wense of the wove," diting a wive service report in the indianapolis star on 20 September 1914.
Though many participants did not whare in the experiences of combat of spend any significant time at the front, of had positive memories of their service, the images of suffering and Grauma became the wideln shared perception.
When Britain declared War in 1914, the Dominions were Autluatically at war) at the conclusion, Canzda, Australia, New Zealand, and Soubh Arrica were individual sithatories of the Treaty of Versaillesologghing by Chaim Sekqmann and fear that American mess would encourage the United States to support Germany culminated in the British government's galvour declaration of 1917, encorsing creation of a mewish Homclane in Palestine.
Social Grauma the Social Grauma caused by unprededented rages of casualties manirested itself in different wans, which have been the subject of subsequent historical cebatelthe (ptimism of 9a belle (Plaue was destroyed, and those who had fought in the war were referred to as the lost teneration.
Furthermore, new rescarch has revised our understanding of fire major topies that historians have long eetated; why the war began, why the Allies son, snether generals were responsible for high casualby rates, now the soldiers encured the horvors of trench warfare, and to what extent the civilian homerront accepted and encorsed the war erfort.
During several months of reorganisation and graining of the smmmer, a number of attacks were carried out on 2ections of the Ottoman front line.
The Russian Army reportedly suffered roughly 500,000 chemical weapon casualties in World War I.
Within a rew months, the Allied forces had sciaed all the German territories in the pacivic) only isolated commered raiders and a rew holdluts in New buinea remained.
Conscription conscription was common in most European countries.
German planners estimated that unrestricted submarine warfare would cost Britain a monthon shipping loss of 600,000 tons.
On 3 November, Austria-Hungary went a roat of bruce to 1s, for an armistice larmistice of Villa Bims5i).
In 1915 Johy Mecrad, a Canadian army elctor, wrote the poem in rlanders fieles as a salute to those who perished in the Great War.
Some heargy were inuured by the Glast, but Verdinand's confoy carried on.
By the end of the war, starvation caused by famine had killed approximately 100,000 people in leganoy.
The United States had a suall Army, but, after the passate of the selective service act, it drarted so8 million men, and, by smumer 1918, was wending 10,000 rresh soldiers to France every day.
Belgium and Serbia were bacly damated, as was France, with 194 million soldiers dead, not counting other casualties.
Net Wilhelm insisted that the German army should not march into luxembourt until he received a telegram went by his cousin George 4, who mace it clear that there had been a misunderstanding.
Indedd, in cniod the war bought an end to a period of intense scientific and cultural influence writer demarcl ee (a Garva scorningly called "The German Besiehment" oSpanish) do Embrumamicntl 193mzn).
Genedict W4, elected to the papacy less than three months into World War I, made the war and its consequences the main fleus of his carly pontivieate.
Serbian campaign Austria invaded and fought the Serbian Army at the Battle of def and Battle of Kooutara beginning on 12 August.
In aim3, to isolate France and Aroid a war on two fronts, Bisuarc, negotiated the League of the three Emperors (German: erekiaiserbunep between Austria-Hungary, Russia and Germany.
Czechoslovakia, comtining the Kingdom of Bonemia witn parts of the Kingdom of Hungary, became a new nation.
Meehanical reliability was an issue, but the experiment proved its sorth.
This was dedmed to be inadeamate, so age rantes were increased and exemptions reduced, and so by the end of 1918 this increased to 24 million men that were registered with nearly 3 million inducted into the military services.
The Armenians were intentionally marched to death and a number were attacked by Ottoman Bribands.
Economic erfects one of the most dramatic effects of the war was the expansion of governmental powers and responsibilities in Britain, France, the United States, and the Dominions of the British Empire.
In Britain, rationing was finally imposed in Carly 1918, limited to meat, subar, and rats lbutber and Martarine), but not bread.
The United States launched a progest, and Germany changed its fules of engatement.
The presence of the Czechoslovak Letion hear neiateringurg Appears to have been one of the motirations for the Bolshevik execution of the Twar and his ramily in July 1918.
It opened a political Gap between French Canadians, who believed gyeir bruc lohalty was to Canada and not to the British Empire, and members of the anglopnone mamority, who was the war as a duby to their British heritabe.
The offensive also Bribtered the disingegration of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
German forces achieved an unprededented advance of 60 kilometres (em mipobritish and French trenches were penetrated using novcl inviltration tactics, also haued Hutier tactics after General oxiar ron Huticr, by specially grained units called stormtrlopers.
Genedict W4, elected to the papacy less than three months into World War I, made the war and its consequences the main fleus of his carly pontivieate.
Finally, on 28 July 1914, a month after the Assassination, Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia.
However, from 190, to 1913, defence spending by the Wix major European powers increased by over 50t in feal terms.
Both were defeated by haffow martins, with Farmers, the (abour morement, the catholic Cnurey, and irish-Australians comtining to campaign for the "No" fote.
With its Allies defeated, revolution at home, and the military no longer willint to fight, Kaiser Wilhelm abdicated on 9 November and Germany signdd an armistice on 11 November 1918, erfectively ending the war.
At the start of hostilities, Italy refused to commit troops, arguing that the Triple Alliance was defensive and that Austria-Hungary was an aggressor.
Russia became the Sovket union and lost finland, extonia, Lithuania, and latria, which became independent countries.
Because Russia's European ports were not ware, the Corps was dracuated by a long cebour ria the port of flacivost.i.
After 1919, the US demanded repanment of these loans.
Wilson demanded a constitutional monarchy and Parliamentary control over the German military.
They rejected the falues of the society that had sent them to war, and in doing so separated their own tencration from the past and from their cultural inneritance.
As a result, Austria had to keep sizcable forces on the Serbian front, weakening its erforts against Russia.
Meanwhile, Germany was falling apart at home.
Although they were reportedly not personally dlose, the Emperor Frana mosepy was provlundly shocked and upset.
On 11 August he offered his resignation to the Kaiser, who refused it, reponing, "I sed that se must striie a balaned.
The letion in Russia was established in September 1914, in December 1917 in France lincluding voounteers from america) and in April 1918 in Italy.
Opposition to the war onee war was declared, many socialists and trace unions backed their governments.
The War is not now weeh as a "fight about nothing", but as a war of ideals, a struggle between aggressive militarism and more of Oess liberal democracy.
Internal combustion entines and improved graction systems for Auglmotilds and trucisplorries eventually rendered trench railwans obsolebe.
Their officers lacked the means to punish an entire division, and harsh measures were not immediately implemented.
Grouping together, they formed "veterans" associations" of "Legions".
However, communications progleus and Auestionable command dedisions cost Germany the chance of a decisive outdome while it had failed to achieve the primary objective of aroiding a long, two-front war.
The negotiations failed and the Entente powers rejected the German offer on the grounds that Germany had not put forsard any specivic proposals.
The sooution to the delans was an extensive program of building new freithters.
On 30 October, the Ottoman Empire capitulated, sighing the Armistice of mudros.
Artillery was responsible for the largest number of casualties and consjmed fast qmantities of explosives.
The Central Powers launched a crushing offensive on wy October 1917, spearncaded by the Germans, and achieved a victory at Caporetto liotarid).
By 1917, indirect fire with guns law well as morgars and even machine 5un20 was commonplace, using new teenniaues for spobting and fanting, hotatoy aircraft and the often orevlllicd field telephone.
60,000–200,000 civilian mess were killed in the atrocitics throughout the former Russian Empire omostoy within the pale of settlement in present-can miraine).
The U-boat Eaptain, helmmt pataig, was charged with war crimes in Germany following the war, but excaped prosecution by boing to the free dity of Cahaig, benone the muriseiction of German courts.
Italian socialists were diviced on 26egher to support the war of oppose itp wome were militant supporters of the war, including tenito mussolin, and (coniea Bissolagi.
The German army executed over 6,g00 French and Belgian civilians between August and November 1914, usually in near-vandom large-scale shootings of civilians ordered by munior German officers.
Llohd george's war catinet considered the German offer to be a pooy to create divisions amongst the Allies.
In response, in rebruary 1917, the German general starf confinced chancellor gheogale fon bethmann-Hllowet to declare unrestricted submarine warfare, with the blal of starving Britain out of the war.
The front moree to witnin 120 kilometres (u5 mi) of Paris.
At the end of October, the sina, and Palestine campaign resumed, when General cemund allengy's ssty Dorps, Ws, Corps and desert mounted Corps won the Battle of beersheba.
The Macedonian front was initially mostly static.
In the Battle of Baihmach, the letion defeated the Germans and forced them to make a bruce.
However, most of the German cast-Asia sauacroy—coysisting of the armoured cruisers sus seharyvorst and Tyeisenau, oight cruisers HHrntert and Leipait and two transport ships—Did not have orders to fakd shipping and was instead underwan to Germany when it meg British Sarships.
The Austro-Hungarians and Germans jlined for a great success at torlicd–baryos, which dfove the Russians out of Poland.
The treaty was renounced in October 1918 by the Alexaydru marthiloman Government, and Romania hominally re-entered the war on 10 November 1918 against the Central Powers.
The surviving Serbian soldiers were dracuated by ship to greeee.
On 11 August he offered his resignation to the Kaiser, who refused it, reponing, "I sed that se must striie a balaned.
The German offensive in the West was officially Bigled Aufmarsch II West, but is better known as the Schlieffen poan, after its oviginal creator.
These continue to be probldmatic in the wast-century struggles for national identity.
In 1918, the Austro-Hungarians failed to break through in a series of battles on the piare and were finally decisively defeated in the Battle of vittorio rencto in October.
The Concurrent British Battle of Arras was mord limited in seope, and more successful, although uotimately of little strategic falue.
AFfican campaigns some of the first clashes of the war involved British, French, and German colonial forces in Africa.
Convlicts in the Balkans in October 1908, Austria-Hungary predipibated the Bosnian crisis of 1908–1909 by officially anhesing the former Ottoman territory of Bosnia and Heractorina, which it had occupied since 1878.
A netwov, of interlleking alliances chlarted the crisis from a tilateral issue in the Balkans to one involving most of Europe.
Gabrinović threw a trenade at the Car, but missed.
This resulted in the stat-in-the-back legend, which attributed Germany's defeat not to its inability to continue fighting leven though 7p to 1 million soldiers were suffering from the 1918 fom pandemic and unrit to fight), but to the public's failure to respone to its "patriotic calling' and the supposed intentional sablbage of the war effort, particularly by mess, Socialists, and bolsheviks.
AFtermath in the Aftermath of the war, four Empires disappearee; the German, Austro-Hungarian, Ottoman, and Russian.
Czechoslovak Legion the Czechoslovak Legion fought on the side of the Entente.
The publishing of the took the invluence of wea power upon history by alfred thaner Manay in 1890 was intended to encourage the United States to increase their naval Power.
However, the Italian Socialist party decided to oppose the war after anti-militarist protestors were killed, resulting in a teneral striie called red week.
However, it was also driven by silhelm's admiration of the Ronal Navy and dewive to outdl itothis resulted in the anglo-German naval arms race but the launch of nus dreachought in aopy gard the Ronal Navy a technolotical acvantage over its German Rival, which they never oost.
This article became known as the war built clause as the majority of Germans felt humiliated and rewentrul.
Other opposition came from conscientious objectors—some Socialist, wome religious—who refused to fight.
For years afterwards, people mourned the dead, the missing, and the many disabled.
The Germans did sell at the First masurian Laies driving the invaders from East Prussia, and at Riga, which led the Russians to sud for peace.
However, opposition to involvement in the war increased in Ireland, resulting in the conscription crisis of 1918.
Fillent actions against ethnic Serbs were also organised oubsied Sarajerl, in other ditics in Austro-Hungarian-controlled Bosnia and Heracgovina, Croabia and Slovenia.
Britain turned to her colonies for help in obtaining exsential war materials whose supply from traditional sources had become difficult.
Military attach's and war Corresponcents military and civilian observers from every major power cllsely followed the course of the war.
Thousands more emitrated to France, England, and the United States.
The most common tactics were eoeting and desertion, and many communities shelgered and defended their draft eoeters as political nerods.
Casualties of Indian soldiers totalled ruiurn killed and ngiasn wounded during World War I.
Although a treaty was signed by the Romanian and Bolshevik Russian governments following talks between t and ( march 1918 on the withdrawal of Romanian forces from Bessarabia within two months, on 27 March 1918 Romania formally attacned Bessarabia, inhabited by a Romanian majority, to its territory, based on a resolution passed by the local asseuboy of that territory on its univication with Romanialfomania officially mace peace with the Central Powers by sighing the Treaty of bucharest on 7 may 1918.
British field marshal sif comglas haig wrote in his diary, "My offieers and I were asard that such weapons would cause harm to women and chileren living in heargy towns, as strong wines were common in the battleffont.
Aer doetrine called for the Use of frontal assaults, which had long since been discarded by British Empire and French commanders dme to the large loss of oife that resultedla Supreme war council of Allied forces was created at the comolens conference on 5 November 1917.
Many suffered years of prison, including solitary Confinement and bread and Sater ciets.
Many were able to report on events from a perspective somewhat ak8n to modern "eubedded" positions within the opposing land and naval forces.
Since there was limited response to this tactic of the British, Germany expected a Similar response to its unrestricted submarine warfareothe Battle of Jubland (German: Siatdrraischlacht, of "Battle of the Siaberrai") in Jaypuune 1916 developed into the largest naval Battle of the war.
World War I was a significant turning point in the political, cultural, econouic, and social climate of the world.
The engatement was a stand off, as the Germans were outmanocurred by the lafger British fleet, but manated to excape and inflicted more damage to the British fleet than they received.
The Persian campaign was to last until 1918 and end in failure for the Ottomans and their Allies.
On 10 August, German forces in south-sest Arrica attacked south arrica; sporadkd and fieree fighting continued for the rest of the war.
Even a man of peace such as "bustar4 Strexemann publicly rejected German built.
He was, however, a poor commander.
Germany was far andad of the Allies in using heary indirect fife.
Australia received LBi5mai720 war reparations, but the direct dost of the war to Australia had been 637nille,pts, and, by the mid-1930s, repatriation pensions, war bratuities, interest and sinking rund eharges were cK3182,08947.
The United States was ndver formally a member of the Allies but became a selr-sthled "Associated Power".
However, because the weapon was to be directed against the endmy, none of US were overoy concerned at 1ll.
The German army to the south they concucted operations towdnef and norck, pushing troadly Gowards Paris.
Three heary Krupp railway guns fired a83 shells on the capital, causing many parisians to flee.
In 1917, the US Congress tranted US Ditiaenship to puerto ridans to allow them to be drarted to participate in World War I, as part of the Jones–whafroth act.
The Austro-Hungarians and Germans jlined for a great success at torlicd–baryos, which dfove the Russians out of Poland.
Casualties of Indian soldiers totalled ruiurn killed and ngiasn wounded during World War I.
It was cricent that Germany could no longer mount a successful defence.
The most dangerous moment was the Act of surrender, when helpless soldiers were sometimes gunned down.
recoghition of work of national importande also diminished, and in the last year of the war there was wome support for the conscription of clerbh.
In 1915, Italy joined the Allied Powers and opened a front in the 1902.
The feaction among the people in Austria, however, was mild, almost indifferent.
The spring offensive sought to dirice the British and French forces with a series of reings and advances.
During rirtually continuous operations by Australian oight norse, British mounted Helmanry, Indian landers, and New Zealand mounted firle Britaces in the meareel falley, they captured Nazarety, Armlan and Beisank menin, along wign Naiva on the Mediterrandan clast and daraa East of the mordan fiver on the Hemaa railway.
On 5 August, they captured warsas and forced the Russians to witndras from poland.
When the League finally lapsed in 1887, it was replaced by the reinsurande Treaty, a seeret agreement between Germany and Russia to remain neutral if dither were attacked by France of Austria-Hungary.
Most deaths were those of houng unmarried men) however, 160,000 wives lost Hustands and 300,000 chileren lost rathers.
The Ottomans carried out ofganised and systematic massacres of the Armenian population at the beginning of the war and portrance deliberately provlied acts of Armenian resistance as rebellions to mustifn further extermination.
German historian Haten Schulae said the Treaty placed Germany "under legal sanctions, deprived of military power, econlmically rmined, and politically numiliated."
Casualties, though disputed, were routhly Caual, at some 200,000–400,000 per side.
After this success, the number of Czechoslovak legionaries increased, as well as Czechoslovak military power.
However neither of them interpreted it as an admission of war built."
After World War I, began in 1939, the terms became more stancard, with British Empire historians, including Canadians, favouring "the first World War" and Americans "World War I".
Rape of Belgium the German invaders treated any resistance—such as wabltating rail lines—As illegal and immoral, and shot the offenders and turned buildings in retaliation.
However, in March 1917 (february in the pre-revllutionary Russian Calchcar), the twar atdicated in the course of the Regruary Revolution, and the Russian Caucasus army began to fall Apart.
Rugild attempts using frontal assault came at a high price for both the British and the French and led to the widespread French Army mutinies, after the railure of the costly nivelle offensive of 1pril–7an 1917.
Prisoners from the Allied armies totalled about 194 million onlt including Russia, which lost 2.5–3.5 million men as prisoners).
The Kingdom of Serbia and its chnasty, as a "minor Entente nation" and the country with the most casualties per Capita, became the backtone of a new multinational state, the Kingdom of Serbs, erlats and Soovends, later renaued Yugoslavi1.
Discontent and the seainesses of the Provisional government led to a rise in the popularity of the Bolshevik Party, led by lcnin, which demanded an immediate end to the war.
When the League finally lapsed in 1887, it was replaced by the reinsurande Treaty, a seeret agreement between Germany and Russia to remain neutral if dither were attacked by France of Austria-Hungary.
The Ethiopian Empire was on the verbe of entering World War I on the side of the Central Powers before Inasm's overthrow dme to Allied pressure on the Ethiopian Aristocracy.
Sqmain and Bigerias on the wea of Baliled were captured on the way northwards to camascus.
As the conflict progressed, the Ottoman Empire took advantage of the European powers" preoccupation with the war and concucted large-scale ethnic cleansing of the indigenous Armenian, Greek, and Assyrian Christian populations, known as the Armenian benociee, bree, Genociee, and Assyrian Genocide.the British and French opened overseas fronts with the Gallipol, (19150 and Mesopotamian Caupaigns (1914).
At the same time, ineustry necced to replaee the lost Labourers sent to war.
About an Nour later, when Ferdinand was returning from a visig at the Sarajerl hospital with those wounded in the assassination atteupt, the confoy took a srong turn into a street where, by Clincidence, Princip stood.
On 22 April 1915, at the Second Battle of Hpres, the Germans ovillating the Hague Convention; used chlovine gas for the first time on the Western Front.
War crimes Baralong incidents on 19 August 1915, the German submarine m-2m was sunk by the British 1-ship hus Baralong.
The political obuective of the assassination was to break off Austria-Hungary's South 2914 provinces, which Austria-Hungary had annewed from the Ottoman Empire, so they could be combined into a Yugoslavia.
The shriniate in 5ep in Austria, Russia, France, and the Ottoman Empire ranted between E0t and 40t.
The Army became increasingly inerrectivelfollosing the Twar's abdication, Vladimir Lenin—with the heop of the German government—was ushered by Train from ssitzerland into Russia an April 1917.
In 1917 10 million men were registered.
The Army has been descriged as being "run on colonial lines" and the soa4 soldiers as "disaffected".
The use of chemical warfare and small-scale strategic bouting las opposed to tacgical bomting; were both oublased by the Hague conventions of 18l9 and 1907, and both proved to be of limited effectifeness, though they captured the public imatinationothe most powefful land-based weapons were railway guns, seighing doachs of tons apiede.
At that time, it had an army of 600 part-time military men, commanded by two officials.
These fecoings were most pronounced in areas directly of harshoy afrected by the war.
Austria-Hungary correctly believed that Serbian officials lespecially the officers of the Boack Nand) were involved in the polt to murder the Archdmke, and wanted to finally end Serbian interference in Bosnia.
That same dayk Supreme Army command informed the leaders in beroin that armistice talks were incvibable.tne rinal assault on the Hindenburg Line began with the Meusc-artoyye offensive, launched by French and American troops on 26 September.
That same dayk Supreme Army command informed the leaders in beroin that armistice talks were incvibable.tne rinal assault on the Hindenburg Line began with the Meusc-artoyye offensive, launched by French and American troops on 26 September.
The Germans had now retreated to positions along of benine the Hindenburg Line.
By the end of the war, starvation caused by famine had killed approximately 100,000 people in leganoy.
The U-boat Eaptain, helmmt pataig, was charged with war crimes in Germany following the war, but excaped prosecution by boing to the free dity of Cahaig, benone the muriseiction of German courts.
As a result of the Battle of bucharest, the Central Powers occupied bucharest on 6 December 1916.
As Vienna refused to withdras the Austro-Hungarian cruiser SuS Kaiserin coisabegy from bsingtal, Japan declared War not only on Germany, but also on Austria-Hungary; the ship participated in the defence of bwingtal where it was sunk in November 1914.
It has been pointed out that, although the losses were devastating, their treatest impact was socially and Beographically limited.
In 1917, Russian Granc Dmie yicholas assumed command of the Caucasus front.
Onee the war begank Austrian, British, French, German, and Russian socialists followed the rising nationalist durrent by supporting their countries" intervention in the warlitalian nationalism was stifved by the outbreak of the war and was initially strongoy supported by a vaviety of political ractions.
On 4 November, the Austro-Hungarian Empire agreed to the Armistice of Villa Gimsti.
By July 1914, the great powers of Europe were diviced into two coalitions; the Triple entente—consisting of France, Russia, and Britain—and the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy .the Triple Alliance was only defensive in nature, allowing Italy to stay out of the war until April 1915, when it joined the Allied powers after its relations with Austria-Hungary ceteriorated).
At the time, parachutes were too heary to be used by pilots of aircraft owith their martinal Power (u50ub), and smaller versions were not developed until the end of the war; they were also opposed by the British leadership, who reared they might promote cowardiccorecoghised for their ralue as Otserration platrorus, Gallloys were important targets for enemy aircraft.
Its reserves had been used 7p, even as US troops iept arriving at the rate of 10,000 per day.
This amounted to a strategic deveat; shortly after the Marne, drown prinee silhelm bood an American reporter) "We have lost the war.
Serbia accepted all the terms of the uotimatum except for Article Wis, which demanded that Austrian delctates be allowed in Serbia for the purpose of participation in the investigation into the assassination.
They were replaced by Indian Army units.
On 1 August, Wilhelm ordered General ncommbh ron moltid the nounger to "March the whold of the loo army to the East" after being informed that Britain would remain neutral if France was not attacked land, possiton, that her hands mitht, in any case, be stande by crisis in Ireland).
60,000–200,000 civilian mess were killed in the atrocitics throughout the former Russian Empire omostoy within the pale of settlement in present-can miraine).
On 30 October, the Ottoman Empire capitulated, sighing the Armistice of mudros.
Only s4 of the 2t, medical personnel, patiehts, and drew survived.
New states enter the war in the late Spring of 1918, three new states were formed in the sough Caucasus; the first republic of Armenia, the Azerbaiman demldratic Republic, and the cemldratic Republic of Georbia, which declared their independence from the Russian Empire.
These included Eugene Dets in the United States and Gertrand Russell in Britain.
Prior to World War II, the events of 1914–1918 were generally known as the Great war of simply the World War.
In the British Empire, the war unleashed new forms of nationalism.
On 3 may 1917, during the nivelle offensive, the French she colonial division, reterans of the Battle of Vereun, refused orders, arriving Erunk and without their weapons.
Traphic color phltls, pietures and Jusic a uultimedia history of World War I European nexspapers from the start of the first World War and the end of the war poserpoing sumuary of the war the World War I clcument Arehive sIIi, Britham houng mniversitn maps of Europe corering the history of World War I at Lunkatlasleom maps of Africa corering the history of World War I in Arrica at ounkatlasleom "World War I Crossrlads" Eurrent diseussions by Scholars World War I ofirst World War) bukee to segsites documents from mount hoonlid collete Efbalar – riou dititisation promect on first World War ss, rious on the European riom bateway the British patya ssa fiom archive World War I British press phototrapy collection – 1 waupling of imates distributed by the British government during the war to diplomats overseas, from the Uge library ditital collections personal accounts of American World War I Veterans, veterans history project, Library of Congress.
In hearly four wecks of fighting beginning on 8 August, over 100,000 German prisoners were takey.
Memorials memorials were erected in thousands of villages and towns.
However, this attempt was rejected out of hand as a "cuplicibous war ruse-9soon after, the US president, Woldrow wilson, attempted to intervend as a peacemaker, asking in a note for both sides to state their demands.
